# ggspec - lightweight unit testing library for GNU Guile

(and other Schemes?)

Copyright 2014 Yawar Amin

See LICENSE file for details

GitHub, Reddit, Twitter: yawaramin

ggspec is a _very_ lightweight unit testing framework for Scheme(s). I am
using it on GNU Guile 1.8.8 but it's very minimal (no external
dependencies) so it will likely run on other Schemes after getting rid
of the Guile `define-module` function at the top.

## Installation

### Guile

Put the `ggspec.scm` file inside a directory named `my` in your
`$GUILE_LOAD_PATH` (you can add your personal directories to this path).
E.g., I have `~/guile` in my load path. So the Scheme file is in:
`~/guile/my/ggspec.scm`.

### Others

Delete the `define-module` function call from the beginning of the
source code, drop the file anywhere you want to use it, and load it
using your Scheme's file loading function.

## Minimal complete example

    guile> (use-modules (my ggspec))
    guile> (run-suite "Hello ggspec" end end end)
      Hello ggspec
      0 test(s), 0 failure(s).
    guile>

## Motivation

There are a few Scheme unit test frameworks out in the wild; even the
'semi-official' guile-lib `(unit-test)`. _But_--they all seem to be
either heavily object-oriented, or not exactly compatible with Guile, or
just little bits of code floating around without clear documentation. So
I decided to just roll my own lightweight unit test framework with the
very basics. Also, I started with the goal of being as purely functional
as possible; but I did take advantage in some places of Scheme's
laid-back approach to impure code.

I'm by no means a Scheme guru, so I've avoided things like macros and
read table modifications and instead used lambdas and alists and also
some trickery that might make some people cringe. But it actually does
work and it looks OK if you squint at it in kind of the right way and it
doesn't depend on anything except some really basic Scheme.  So I have a
feeling (but nothing more solid) that it will run easily on most
implementations, including Racket.

## Documentation

See the end of the `ggspec.scm` file for a demonstration. A detailed
reference:

### run-suite

Defines and runs a test suite.

Arguments:

  - `suite-desc` - string: a description of the test suite
  
  - `setup-specs` - alist of symbols to functions which don't take any
  arguments, and return one value

  This association list is used to set up an 'environment' of names and
  their associated values. If you're familiar with the xUnit style, this
  is analogous to the `setUp()` function in each test suite class that
  sets up frequently-used values which can then be accessed by each
  test case. Accessing the values in ggspec is explained later.

  Building the `setup-specs` alist is simplified with a little
  definition trickery. The `setup` and `end` names are aliased to the
  `acons` function so that:

    (setup 'x (lambda () 1)
    (setup 'y (lambda () 2)
    (setup 'z (lambda () 3)
    end)))

  ... becomes:

    (acons
      'x
      (lambda () 1)
      (acons
        'y
        (lambda () 2)
        (acons
          'z
          (lambda () 3)
          '())))

  (Note: I'm using the function name `acons`, which may not be available
  in all Schemes; but it's the same thing as SRFI-1's `alist-cons`.)

  - `test-specs` - alist of strings to functions which take a single
  argument and return either `#t` (success) or `#f` (failure)

  This alist is used to run the actual tests. Each test spec is a pair
  made up of a string describing the test and a function which carries
  out the test.

  The function takes a single argument `e`--the 'environment' which was
  previously defined by `setup-specs`--and returns a boolean to indicate
  test pass or fail. (You must define the function with the `e`
  parameter whether you defined any setup specs earlier or not). If
  you defined any setup specs earlier, you can access their values by
  calling `e` with the name given to the set up variable:

    (e 'x) => 1
    (e 'y) => 2
    (e 'z) => 3

  Again, building the test specs alist is simplified with some similar
  definition trickery. The `run-test` name is aliased so that:

    (run-test "x plus y should equal z"
      (lambda (e)
        (assert-equal (e 'z) (+ (e 'x) (e 'y))))
    (run-test "x minus y should not equal z"
      (lambda (e)
        (assert-not-equal (e 'z) (- (e 'x) (e 'y))))
    (run-test "z divided by y should have quotient x"
      (lambda (e)
        (assert-equal (e 'x) (quotient (e 'z) (e 'y))))
    end)))

  ... expands out to the proper alist, as explained above.

  - `teardown-funcs` - list (not alist) of functions which take a single
  value and don't (intentionally) return anything

  The teardown functions are each called with the 'environment' (`e`)
  that was initially defined in the suite. If you don't have any
  teardown to do you can pass in an empty list, or the `end` name which
  has been bound to the empty list:

    (run-suite "Demo"
      ... ;; setup-specs
      ... ;; test-specs
      end) ;; teardown-funcs

### assert-equal

Checks whether the expected and actual values are equal.

Arguments:

  - `expected` - any: the expected value

  - `got` - any: the actual value

  If the two differ, immediately prints the actual and expected values.

Returns:

  `#t` if the expected and received values are the same; `#f` otherwise.

### assert-not-equal

Like `assert-equal`, but checks that the opposite is true.

Arguments:

  - `not-expected` - any

  - `got` - any

  If the two are the same, immediately prints the values.

Returns:

  `#t` if the expected and receive values differ; `#f` otherwise.

### assert-true

Checks whether something is true.

Arguments:

  - `x` - any

  If `x` evaluates to `#f`, immediately prints it.

Returns:

  The truth value of `x`.

### run-test, setup

As explained above, these are aliases for the `acons` Scheme function to
provide a little 'syntactic sugar' for building up lists of setup and
test specs.

### end

This is just the empty list; again, to help provide a more
natural-looking way to construct setups and tests.

Also, a nice way to finish off the reference.

